README.md, before:

# `tsidp` - Tailscale OpenID Connect (OIDC) Identity Provider

> [!CAUTION]
> This is an experimental update of tsidp. It is under active development and may experience breaking changes.

[![status: community project](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-community_project-blue)](https://tailscale.com/kb/1531/community-projects)

`tsidp` is an OIDC / OAuth Identity Provider (IdP) server that integrates with your Tailscale network. It allows you to use Tailscale identities for authentication into applications that support OpenID Connect as well as authenticated MCP client / server connections.

## Prerequisites

- A Tailscale network (tailnet) with magicDNS and HTTPS enabled
- A Tailscale authentication key from your tailnet
- (Recommended) Docker installed on your system
- Ability to set an Application capability grant

## Running tsidp

### (Recommended) Using the pre-built image

Docker images are automatically published on when releases are tagged.

```bash
# to use the latest image
$ docker pull ghcr.io/tailscale/tsidp:latest

# to use a specific release version
$ docker pull ghcr.io/tailscale/tsidp:v0.0.2
```

Running a tsidp container:

> [!TIP]
> Replace `YOUR_TAILSCALE_AUTHKEY` with your Tailscale authentication key in the following commands:
>
> Use an existing auth key or create a new auth key in the [Tailscale dashboard](https://login.tailscale.com/admin/settings/keys). Ensure you select an existing [tag](https://tailscale.com/kb/1068/tags) or create a new one.

```bash
# Run tsidp with a persistent volume to store state
docker run -d \
  --name tsidp \
  -p 443:443 \
  -v tsidp-data:/data \
  -e TAILSCALE_USE_WIP_CODE=1 \
  -e TS_STATE_DIR=/data \
  -e TS_HOSTNAME=idp \
  -e TSIDP_ENABLE_STS=1 \
  ghcr.io/tailscale/tsidp:latest
```

Visit `https://idp.yourtailnet.ts.net` to confirm the service is running.

> [!NOTE]
> If you're running tsidp for the first time it may take a few minutes for the TLS certificate to generate. You may not be able to access the service until the certificate is ready.

### Other Ways to Build and Run

<details>
<summary>Building your own container</summary>

```bash
$ make docker-image
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>Using Go directly</summary>

If you'd like to build tsidp and / or run it directly you can do the following:

```bash
# Clone the Tailscale repository
$ git clone https://github.com/tailscale/tsidp.git
$ cd tsidp

# run with default values for flags
$ TAILSCALE_USE_WIP_CODE=1 TS_AUTHKEY={YOUR_TAILSCALE_AUTHKEY} TSNET_FORCE_LOGIN=1 go run .
```

</details>

## Setting an Application Capability Grant

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Access to the admin UI and dynamic client registration endpoints are **denied** by default.

> [!WARNING]
> tsidp's application capability schema are still in development and may change at anytime.

- Set an [Application capability](https://tailscale.com/kb/1537/grants-app-capabilities) to grant access to the admin UI and DCR endpoints.
- Configure grants in the [Tailscale console](https://login.tailscale.com/admin/acls/).
- App capability grants are per request and updated immediately. No need to restart tsidp.

### Example

```hujson
"grants": [
  {
    // Very permissive and suitable only for testing.
    "src": ["*"],
    "dst": ["*"],

    // Example of a grant for tsidp:
    "app": {
      "tailscale.com/cap/tsidp": [
        {
          // allow access to UI
          "allow_admin_ui": true,

          // allow dynamic client registration
          "allow_dcr": true,

          // Secure Token Service (STS) controls
          "users":     ["*"],
          "resources": ["*"],

          // extraClaims are included in the id_token
          // recommend: keep this small and simple
          "extraClaims": {
            "bools": true,
            "strings": "Mon Jan 2 15:04:05 MST 2006",
            "numbers": 180,
            "array1": [1,2,3],
            "array2": ["one", "two", "three"]
          },

          // include extraClaims data in /userinfo response
          "includeInUserInfo": true,
        },
      ],
    },
  },
],
```

## tsidp Configuration Options

The `tsidp-server` is configured by several command-line flags:

| Flag                    | Description                                                                                        | Default  |
| ----------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- |
| `-dir <path>`           | Directory path to save tsnet and tsidp state. Recommend to be set.                                 | `""`     |
| `-hostname <hostname>`  | hostname on tailnet. Will become `<hostname>.your-tailnet.ts.net`                                  | `idp`    |
| `-port <port>`          | Port to listen on                                                                                  | `443`    |
| `-local-port <port>`    | Listen on `localhost:<port>`. Useful for testing                                                   | disabled |
| `-use-local-tailscaled` | Use local tailscaled instead of tsnet                                                              | `false`  |
| `-funnel`               | Use Tailscale Funnel to make tsidp available on the public internet so it works with SaaS products | disabled |
| `-enable-sts`           | Enable OAuth token exchange using RFC 8693                                                         | disabled |
| `-log <level>`          | Set logging level: `debug`, `info`, `warn`, `error`                                                | `info`   |
| `-debug-all-requests`   | For development. Prints all requests and responses                                                 | disabled |
| `-debug-tsnet`          | For development. Enables debug level logging with tsnet connection                                 | disabled |

### CLI Environment Variables

The `tsidp-server` binary is configured through the CLI flags above. However, there are several environment variables that configure the libraries `tsidp-server` uses to connect to the Tailnet.

#### Required

- `TAILSCALE_USE_WIP_CODE=1`: required while tsidp is in development (<v1.0.0).

#### Optional

These environment variables are used when tsidp does not have any state information set in `-dir <path>`.

- `TS_AUTHKEY=<key>`: Key for registering a tsidp as a new node on your tailnet. If omitted a link will be printed to manually register.
- `TSNET_FORCE_LOGIN=1`: Force re-login of the node. Useful during development.

### Docker Environment Variables

The Docker image exposes the CLI flags through environment variables. If omitted the default values for the CLI flags will be used.

> [!NOTE] > `TS_STATE_DIR` and `TS_HOSTNAME` are legacy names. These will be replaced by `TSIDP_STATE_DIR` and `TSIDP_HOSTNAME` in the future.

| Environment Variable                     | CLI flag                   |
| ---------------------------------------- | -------------------------- |
| `TS_STATE_DIR=<path>` _\*note prefix_    | `-dir <path>`              |
| `TS_HOSTNAME=<hostname>` _\*note prefix_ | `-hostname <hostname>`     |
| `TSIDP_PORT=<port>`                      | `-port <port>`             |
| `TSIDP_LOCAL_PORT=<local-port>`          | `-local-port <local-port>` |
| `TSIDP_USE_FUNNEL=1`                     | `-funnel`                  |
| `TSIDP_ENABLE_STS=1`                     | `-enable-sts`              |
| `TSIDP_LOG=<level>`                      | `-log <level>`             |
| `TSIDP_DEBUG_TSNET=1`                    | `-debug-tsnet`             |
| `TSIDP_DEBUG_ALL_REQUESTS=1`             | `-debug-all-requests`      |

## Application Configuration Guides (WIP)

tsidp can be used as IdP server for any application that supports custom OIDC providers.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Note: If you'd like to use tsidp to login to a SaaS application outside of your tailnet rather than a self-hosted app inside of your tailnet, you'll need to run tsidp with `--funnel` enabled.

- [Proxmox](docs/proxmox/README.md)

### TODOs

- (TODO) Grafana
- (TODO) open-webui
- (TODO) Jellyfin
- (TODO) Salesforce
- (TODO) ...

## MCP Configuration Guides

tsidp supports all of the endpoints required & suggested by the [MCP Authorization specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/draft/basic/authorization), including Dynamic Client Registration (DCR). More information can be found in the following examples:

- [MCP Client / Server](./examples/mcp-server/README.md)
- [MCP Client / Gateway Server](./examples/mcp-gateway/README.md)

## Support

This is an experimental, work in progress, [community project](https://tailscale.com/kb/1531/community-projects). For issues or questions, file issues on the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/tailscale/tsidp).

## License

BSD-3-Clause License. See [LICENSE](./LICENSE) for details.

Commit message:

README: replace docker run with a docker compose yaml file
Fixes: #86

Signed-off-by: Alex Kretzschmar <alexktz@gmail.com>

README.md, after:

# `tsidp` - Tailscale OpenID Connect (OIDC) Identity Provider

> [!CAUTION]
> This is an experimental update of tsidp. It is under active development and may experience breaking changes.

[![status: community project](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-community_project-blue)](https://tailscale.com/kb/1531/community-projects)

`tsidp` is an OIDC / OAuth Identity Provider (IdP) server that integrates with your Tailscale network. It allows you to use Tailscale identities for authentication into applications that support OpenID Connect as well as authenticated MCP client / server connections.

## Prerequisites

- A Tailscale network (tailnet) with magicDNS and HTTPS enabled
- A Tailscale authentication key from your tailnet
- (Recommended) Docker installed on your system
- Ability to set an Application capability grant

## Running tsidp

### (Recommended) Using the pre-built image

Docker images are automatically published on when releases are tagged.

> [!TIP]
> Replace `YOUR_TAILSCALE_AUTHKEY` with your Tailscale authentication key in the following commands:
>
> Use an existing auth key or create a new auth key in the [Tailscale dashboard](https://login.tailscale.com/admin/settings/keys). Ensure you select an existing [tag](https://tailscale.com/kb/1068/tags) or create a new one.

Here is an example [docker compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) YAML file for tsidp:

```yaml
services:
  tsidp:
    container_name: tsidp
    image: ghcr.io/tailscale/tsidp:latest
    volumes:
      - tsidp-data:/data
    environment:
      - TAILSCALE_USE_WIP_CODE=1 # tsidp is experimental - needed while version <1.0.0
      - TS_STATE_DIR=/data # store persistent tsnet and tsidp state
      - TS_HOSTNAME=idp # Hostname on tailnet (becomes idp.your-tailnet.ts.net)
      - TSIDP_ENABLE_STS=1 # Enable OAuth token exchange
      # Optional: Tailscale auth key for automatic node registration
      # - TS_AUTHKEY=tskey-auth-xxxxx
volumes:
  tsidp-data:
```

Paste the YAML snippet above into a file named `compose.yaml`. Once the compose file has been edited to your satisfaction, start tsidp by issuing `docker compose up -d`. Monitor the result with `docker compose logs -f`.

Once tsidp has started, visit `https://idp.yourtailnet.ts.net` in a browser to confirm the service is running.

> [!NOTE]
> If you're running tsidp for the first time it may take a few minutes for the TLS certificate to generate. You may not be able to access the service until the certificate is ready.

### Other Ways to Build and Run

<details>
<summary>Building your own container</summary>

```bash
$ make docker-image
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>Using Go directly</summary>

If you'd like to build tsidp and / or run it directly you can do the following:

```bash
# Clone the Tailscale repository
$ git clone https://github.com/tailscale/tsidp.git
$ cd tsidp

# run with default values for flags
$ TAILSCALE_USE_WIP_CODE=1 TS_AUTHKEY={YOUR_TAILSCALE_AUTHKEY} TSNET_FORCE_LOGIN=1 go run .
```

</details>

## Setting an Application Capability Grant

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Access to the admin UI and dynamic client registration endpoints are **denied** by default.

> [!WARNING]
> tsidp's application capability schema are still in development and may change at anytime.

- Set an [Application capability](https://tailscale.com/kb/1537/grants-app-capabilities) to grant access to the admin UI and DCR endpoints.
- Configure grants in the [Tailscale console](https://login.tailscale.com/admin/acls/).
- App capability grants are per request and updated immediately. No need to restart tsidp.

### Example

```hujson
"grants": [
  {
    // Very permissive and suitable only for testing.
    "src": ["*"],
    "dst": ["*"],

    // Example of a grant for tsidp:
    "app": {
      "tailscale.com/cap/tsidp": [
        {
          // allow access to UI
          "allow_admin_ui": true,

          // allow dynamic client registration
          "allow_dcr": true,

          // Secure Token Service (STS) controls
          "users":     ["*"],
          "resources": ["*"],

          // extraClaims are included in the id_token
          // recommend: keep this small and simple
          "extraClaims": {
            "bools": true,
            "strings": "Mon Jan 2 15:04:05 MST 2006",
            "numbers": 180,
            "array1": [1,2,3],
            "array2": ["one", "two", "three"]
          },

          // include extraClaims data in /userinfo response
          "includeInUserInfo": true,
        },
      ],
    },
  },
],
```

## tsidp Configuration Options

The `tsidp-server` is configured by several command-line flags:

| Flag                    | Description                                                                                        | Default  |
| ----------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- |
| `-dir <path>`           | Directory path to save tsnet and tsidp state. Recommend to be set.                                 | `""`     |
| `-hostname <hostname>`  | hostname on tailnet. Will become `<hostname>.your-tailnet.ts.net`                                  | `idp`    |
| `-port <port>`          | Port to listen on                                                                                  | `443`    |
| `-local-port <port>`    | Listen on `localhost:<port>`. Useful for testing                                                   | disabled |
| `-use-local-tailscaled` | Use local tailscaled instead of tsnet                                                              | `false`  |
| `-funnel`               | Use Tailscale Funnel to make tsidp available on the public internet so it works with SaaS products | disabled |
| `-enable-sts`           | Enable OAuth token exchange using RFC 8693                                                         | disabled |
| `-log <level>`          | Set logging level: `debug`, `info`, `warn`, `error`                                                | `info`   |
| `-debug-all-requests`   | For development. Prints all requests and responses                                                 | disabled |
| `-debug-tsnet`          | For development. Enables debug level logging with tsnet connection                                 | disabled |

### CLI Environment Variables

The `tsidp-server` binary is configured through the CLI flags above. However, there are several environment variables that configure the libraries `tsidp-server` uses to connect to the Tailnet.

#### Required

- `TAILSCALE_USE_WIP_CODE=1`: required while tsidp is in development (<v1.0.0).

#### Optional

These environment variables are used when tsidp does not have any state information set in `-dir <path>`.

- `TS_AUTHKEY=<key>`: Key for registering a tsidp as a new node on your tailnet. If omitted a link will be printed to manually register.
- `TSNET_FORCE_LOGIN=1`: Force re-login of the node. Useful during development.

### Docker Environment Variables

The Docker image exposes the CLI flags through environment variables. If omitted the default values for the CLI flags will be used.

> [!NOTE] > `TS_STATE_DIR` and `TS_HOSTNAME` are legacy names. These will be replaced by `TSIDP_STATE_DIR` and `TSIDP_HOSTNAME` in the future.

| Environment Variable                     | CLI flag                   |
| ---------------------------------------- | -------------------------- |
| `TS_STATE_DIR=<path>` _\*note prefix_    | `-dir <path>`              |
| `TS_HOSTNAME=<hostname>` _\*note prefix_ | `-hostname <hostname>`     |
| `TSIDP_PORT=<port>`                      | `-port <port>`             |
| `TSIDP_LOCAL_PORT=<local-port>`          | `-local-port <local-port>` |
| `TSIDP_USE_FUNNEL=1`                     | `-funnel`                  |
| `TSIDP_ENABLE_STS=1`                     | `-enable-sts`              |
| `TSIDP_LOG=<level>`                      | `-log <level>`             |
| `TSIDP_DEBUG_TSNET=1`                    | `-debug-tsnet`             |
| `TSIDP_DEBUG_ALL_REQUESTS=1`             | `-debug-all-requests`      |

## Application Configuration Guides (WIP)

tsidp can be used as IdP server for any application that supports custom OIDC providers.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Note: If you'd like to use tsidp to login to a SaaS application outside of your tailnet rather than a self-hosted app inside of your tailnet, you'll need to run tsidp with `--funnel` enabled.

- [Proxmox](docs/proxmox/README.md)

### TODOs

- (TODO) Grafana
- (TODO) open-webui
- (TODO) Jellyfin
- (TODO) Salesforce
- (TODO) ...

## MCP Configuration Guides

tsidp supports all of the endpoints required & suggested by the [MCP Authorization specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/draft/basic/authorization), including Dynamic Client Registration (DCR). More information can be found in the following examples:

- [MCP Client / Server](./examples/mcp-server/README.md)
- [MCP Client / Gateway Server](./examples/mcp-gateway/README.md)

## Support

This is an experimental, work in progress, [community project](https://tailscale.com/kb/1531/community-projects). For issues or questions, file issues on the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/tailscale/tsidp).

## License

BSD-3-Clause License. See [LICENSE](./LICENSE) for details.
